<!--
 - TODO ADD Illustration ( see assests in report folder )
 - TODO: add two components not tested
 - TODO:
   - by any means able to do after 5month in a position to do  full exhaustive ISO25010 of CSS. But we can show what in our experience has been in favor of disfor of each of the given criteria.
 -  - review different models of soft quality review
 - a few critera from iso25010 taken
 - added community critera since open source project
 3 level of complexity :
  - standalone CSS
  - CSS ecosystem
  - CERN's recipe
-->


## CSS software quality review

Based on our experience in creating a CSS instance into CERN's infrastructure, we will go to a review of the software quality of CSS. We will base our review on the ISO25010.

The ISO25000s are a series of software and data quality standards defined by the International Organization for Standardization, developing and publishing worldwide technical standards. In particular, the ISO25010 defines a framework to measure software quality. All ISO25010 criteria might not be relevant depending on the reviewed software. Also, in our case, criteria might apply CSS as standalone software or at our particular CERN's CSS recipe implementation.

The review is limited by the understanding and technical knowledge acquired in the process of this thesis. Therefore, it is by any means a complete and exhaustive ISO25010 review. We will, for each criterion, advance factual arguments in favor or disfavor based on our experience. 

Each criterion will be stylized in *italic* and refer to the official ISO25010 definition. Therefore, we recommend the user either read the definition before or alongside the following section.

### Functional Suitability


The *functional completeness* and *functional correctness* are clearly defined by the solid specification and the solid test suit, respectively. The solid test suit provides an independent test suite to confront software to the solid specification. Currently CSS passes all tests of solid 0.9 specification <!-- TODO REF -->. Therefore we can say that CSS has strong  *functional completeness and correctness*. 

<!-- Only concern CSS as a standalone server, need redo test for specific implementation of CERN  -->

In practice, we have during the *Terra Incogigna* user test,  experienced a user not being able to delete his account, and the intervention of the sys-admin was required to perform this action<!-- TODO ADD ref gh issue -->. The former shows that CSS v2 lacks at least this point of *functional appropriateness*. We precise v2, because the issue has been reported and should be fixed in the later CSS iteration <!-- TODO REF -->

<!-- TODO NEED to split we instance and CSS standalone -->

<!-- Conserning CSS3 see https://github.com/CommunitySolidServer/CommunitySolidServer/discussions/1234 -->

<!-- https://github.com/solid/test-suite
 -->
<!-- TODO: Even if CSS has a very minimaliste UI, has it encorage the decoupling of the UI, we would expect account deletion form this minimal UI. -->

As a final word, CSS addresses well the *functional suitability* for developers' needs. However, some tasks could be facilitated for the end-user in practice.

### Performance efficiency 
<!-- 
CSS time behaviour show decent result as shown in section TODO ram_vs_disc.:

compared to solidcommunity.net
compared to raw express

build: link github issue
 - memory
 - storage
run:
 - memory storage

    -> TODO run stress test, response time, ressource utilisation
    -> try to make it crash
    -> no benchmark available TODO: REF RUBENS
 -->

Did not run performance efficiency on CSS, as we didn't judge it of critical importance for CERN CSS needs. <!-- TODO REWRITE -->

However, regarding *capacity*, which only applies to our CERN's recipe, capacity can be effortlessly extended on the persistent volume with openshift infrastructure. Moreover, the DevOps setup splits the application and the storage; hence, the persistent volume can be switched to another hard drive with low maintenance. To achieve the former, one would need to copy an existing file to the other hard drive and mount the new hard drive to the application machine, for example, to switch from an SSH  to an HHD storage.

<!-- TODO: install test Performance -->

### Compatibility

Highly relying on linked data and W3C standard CSS show robust *interoperability* features.
<!-- TODO also API -->
A confirmation of this *interoperability* is its decoupling of the UI. Surely, we have experienced issues with some UI build for NSS, but these issues come from differences in authentification implementation between the two servers, and the authentification specification of Solid is still evolving <!--. Solid is still in an experimental phase and not widely used for production, therefore backward compatibility might not be importante.  [ TODO REF RUBEN ] -->. Another example of good *interoperability* is that we could create pods with external WebIDs hosted on an NSS server. <!-- [ TODO easytoken] -->



*Co-existent* is not relevant to us, as CSS runs in its environment without other software.

Finally, we can say that CSS has strong *compatibility* quality, as it is built upon W3C standards, a client/server API design and a dependency injection framework.

### Usability TODO

TODO

<!-- 
#### for users: would require advance UI tests
Terra Incogigna

 - Appropriateness recognizability
   -> user test: can I delete file from penny?
 - Learnability
   -> user test: user able to performe task without help?
 - Operability
   -> Depends on the UI,to hard to mesur
 - User error protection. Degree to which a system protects users against making errors.
   -> allow user to do everything with their data: can be dangerous
   -> no mechanisme to prevent user from deleting sensitive data, except "typing the name of the file"
   -> no protection against wrong authorisation
 
 - User interface aesthetics
   - need user test
 - Accessibility
   - find w3c accessibility test?

#### for developsers

 - Learnability
   - poor doc for CSS
   - doc WIP for components.js
   - components.js important part of learning
   - good doc on linked data, jsonld and other requirement
   -> user test: user able to performe task without help?
 -->

### Reliability

Concerning CSS *maturity*, even if CSS does most of the essential functions of a Solid Server, it would be hard to say that CSS is a mature software when we confront it in real-life practice. An example can be taken from our user test where a user could not delete their accounts. CSS comes by default with a minimum set of components <!-- at the total opposite of SolidOs ( that powers `solidcommunity.net` ), which contains a full set of built-in features TODO: solidos not a server -->. Therefore, from an end-user perspective, CSS relies strongly on its ecosystem. As we could witness from the limited amount of available UI and the SSO integration, the ecosystem is still a work in progress and lacks maturity, affecting CSS end-experience and maturity. <!--On the bright side, with the growing enthusiasm  [TODO REF MAria slide] around solid, time seems to be the only factor ... solving previouslly stated issue. TODO REWRITE . Can blame CSS youth for that, should be -->

<!-- - Availability
    - TODO test availabilty on CERN's CSS ( bot )
    - TODO add screenshots
 -->
Regarding *fault tolerance*, standalone CSS shows good features. Explicit errors are shown on its HTML form if fields are not fulfilled correctly. The same goes for the API, which shows clear error messages in case of a faulty request. We did not experience the server crashing, even under the stress of the speed test experiment. <!-- TODO should be further stress test , might be done by solid lab ( add ref ) --> The registration form was also handling correctly non-Latin character set, as shown in the security chapter<!-- [TODO security chapter] -->.

The setup described in the DevOps <!-- [TODO devops] --> section should show good *recoverability* capacity. Indeed, decoupling the application and user data in a persistent volume should allow plugging another recipe ( for example, a previous version in case of a rollback ) while keeping the same routing and user data. 

CSS shows overall good *reliability* feature to a certain extent. Undoubtedly, CSS is a young software that relies on third-party components and the fact that the ecosystem is not entirely mature yet affects CSS maturity.


### Security

CSS *authenticity* relies on Solid-OIDC, a more secure flavor of the standard and widely used Open ID Connect protocol.
<!--  TODO CSS benefice from OIDC experience and popularity [https://trends.builtwith.com/widgets/Keycloak][https://trends.builtwith.com/docinfo/OpenID] -->
In that matter, CSS uses state-of-the-art authentication protocol.
<!-- TODO compare to NSS -->

About *integrity* and *confidentiality*, CSS uses the Web of Access Control, defined by the Solid specification and common to all Solid servers. <!-- TODO Therefore cannot demarquer from other apps
 --> No resource has been found to measure the security implication of the Web Access Control mechanism.
 
<!-- Accountability minmal Logs are kept by CSS 
 -->

On a general note, it is essential to know that no security audit has been done on CSS yet. In our experience, we show that passwords were hashed using the OWASP recommended bcrypt algorithm. We also show in the security chapter<!-- [TODO security chapter] --> that CSS could be an opportunity for phishing attacks under default configuration. 

<!-- bcrypt password -->

<!-- 
TODO brute force registration, login 
 -->
 To conclude, we believe the security of CSS is uncertain. Unfortunately, not enough resources are available to give an enlighted judgment on that matter. <!-- TODO however should be safe if deployed to trusted crowded of users -->

### Maintainability

Maintainability plays a vital role in software quality because bad maintainability forces radical decisions, such as switching to another software solution.

Divided into small independent components with componentsjs and build with a client-server API design, CSS shows great *modularity* and *modifiability* features. 
In this thesis, we show of few examples of this modularity. We have been able to create our custom-made registration page with the easy-token implementation and integrate it to CSS without modifying the source code. We have been able to build our UI or plug existing UI into CSS. Developers can easily replace most CSS building blocks with other ones through its dependency injection.


Componentsjs also provide great *reusability* characteristics, as components can be imported and exported from one recipe to another. Moreover, general-purpose components can be exported from one software ( even non-CSS software ) to another as long as they are built with componentsjs.


<!-- *Testability* hard to test compatibility with other component ( UI for eg. ) highly configurable software => one test would require to be test on every configuration combination.
 -->
<!-- TODO testability and Analysability
 -->

 Globally, we can say that CSS shows excellent *maintainability* attributes that will allow it to evolve in time. Therefore, CSS can be considered a good long-term bet.


### Portability

As for *portability*, CSS has good *installability* and *adaptability* characteristics, as it can be deployed as an NPM package or through a Docker image. Therefore it is installable on any machine that can run the required NPM or Docker version. NPM and Docker are popular enough to be robust in the long-term evolution of infrastructure environment. In term of *replaceability*, our recipe should be seamlessly replaced with another CSS recipe, thanks to the user storage and application decoupling. However, replacing it with another Solid Server would be more complicated. Even if the file-based storage should ease the switch to another software, user credentials might be compicated to transfer, depending on the implementation of the other Solid server.
<!--  -> Replaceability:
   -> user: with IDP POd based on standard, easy to switch to another Solid server.
   ->
 -->

CSS shows substantial *portability* characteristic, as it can be easily installed and transferred to various environments.




[^iso25000.com]: https://iso25000.com/index.php/en/iso-25000-standards/iso-25010

